What is Node js?
Well, Node js is JavaScript kinda
like what I said before, but
more specifically it's
a runtime built on Chrome's V8.
If you've never heard of Chrome's V8, it's
the engine that sits inside of Chrome that
actually compiles your
JavaScript down to machine code.
So it can be processed because JavaScript
actually has to be interpreted and
executed on a machine.
V8 is the engine that does that.
So some really smart person decided
to strip V8 [LAUGH] out of Chrome and
stick it on a machine.
And that allows you to run Node and
that's basically what we have here and
everything is built on top of that.
So just like on the front end, JavaScript
and Node is also gonna be based off
an event loop, which if you don't
really know what that means, we'll get
into it a little more but just know is
that JavaScript is single threaded.
As in, it's only going to
be able to process work and
amount of work in one
little isolated instance.
And then everything else
kinda runs in the background.
This allows Node to be able to process
things much faster than a lot of
other OS level languages,
as long as those tasks are not CPU bound.
So if you're not doing things like
arithmetic or AI or machine learning,
Node js is probably a perfect tool for
you because it can handle things and
put them in the background and continue to
stay open to handle incoming requests and
things like that.
So that's why it's a very popular tool
because it kinda allows you to scale
a lot faster for smaller tasks like API's,
which are like 90% of back
end apps these days anyway.
So that was a whole lot.
Well, we're gonna cover
a lot of that stuff.
And like I said, here's the some of
the use cases that I think are really,
really good for Node js.
Some of the things you see in the wild,
some of the things that I've used
personally, myself, so things like API's
and servers, which we are gonna cover
today, we're gonna be going over that and
how to do that.
Databases, yes, there're literally
are some databases built in JavaScript.
And it kinda blows my mind how people
get away with this cuz I've looked
at source code I'm like, first,
I don't even know how to make a database.
And second of all,
the fact that you did it in
JavaScript is just even more amazing.
But yeah,
I've seen databases built in Node.
CLI, so a command line interface,
if you've ever used Git, you've ever used
anything in your terminal, your command
prompt that was a command line interface.
We're also gonna be covering
some of that as well.
So you'll be making your own CLIs
build tools and automations.
If you're a front end developer, you're
probably familiar with something called
Babel, maybe even TypeScript,
Webpack, roll up.
All those tools are built and
executed in the Node runtime.
So If you've never used Node as a front
end engineer, but you've used those tools,
well, you have been using
Node this whole time.
Because those tools execute in Node
before your app actually gets deployed to
the browser, that's what Node is doing.
Basic scripting, you want some automation
set up to do some shortcut get commands,
you wanna have some basic commands
in your terminal that don't exist,
you can do that.
Simple automations that
open up a browser and
buys a pair of sneakers for
you, stuff like that.
And like I said,
[LAUGH] GPU shopping for bots,
because no one can buy a GPU right now.
You could pretty much do all this
stuff in Node, and more, and
we'll be covering a lot of it.
So I'm super excited.
So let's jump right in, and
get started with Node js.
So the first thing obviously is
we need to install Node js and
there are a few ways to do it.
And it also depends on
the machine that you're on.
So for the windows folks out there
if you're not running WSO or
WSO2, which is a Linux environment
embedded inside of windows.
If you don't have that,
then I do recommend going to the official
Node.js installer on
the nodejs.org website,
where it will detect your operating system
and it will allow you to download it.
Mine says mac because I'm on a mac,
if yours is windows it
will probably say windows.
So I recommend installing it that way.
But if you if you aren't on Windows, or
anyone else who's not windows basically,
I do recommend using something
called nvm or Node Version Manager.
And the definition is in the name, it's
literally a tool that manages different
versions of Node on your machine.
And the reason why I recommend this is for
a few reasons,
one it's very convenient to be able to
switch to different versions of Node.
Because different versions of
Node have different features,
different language support and
things like that.
So you can apply your app to different
targets, it's great for testing, great for
determining what version you need on a
deployment platform which is very useful.
And then also on a Mac,
at least in my experience and
working with others when you install from
the official source, sometimes you have
permission errors with the folders
where Node actually gets installed.
You just kinda have to Sudo everything and
it just gets really crappy.
So to avoid that Node Version Manager
just doesn't work around and
doesn't install inside of that folder
that causes those permission errors.
So yes, I highly recommend nvm,
you click on that link that I have and
you go to their repo.
If you scroll down you'll see a nice copy
and pastable curl thing here that you
can paste and run and it'll pretty
much get you set up and good to go.
So if you don't have node installed yet,
I do recommend installing it.
If you do have Node installed,
we are gonna use a specific version.
And the one that we're gonna use
is going to be the latest LTS or
was it long term support or
Lifetime support?
It's one of those, it's the one that they
plan on supporting on the long run for
now, although it's not the absolute
latest, 16 would be the latest but
it's not the latest LTS.
So we're gonna use the latest LTS,
which right now is 14.7.0.
So if you don't have that version,
I would at least recommend downloading
version 14 at the minimal to make sure you
have some of the things that
we're gonna cover in this course.
Because we are gonna be using some of the
bleeding edge things because I want this
course to be somewhat future proof and
I don't want to teach outdated things and
older versions.
So yes, I highly recommend downloading at
least version 14 here to be able to keep
up with what we're doing.
If you do download version 16
you should be more than fine,
there's nothing wrong with that.
I just want to support the long
term support version of Node js.
Okay, and once you have nvm installed,
you could actually just run this command
right here in nvm install -- LTS.
And it's just gonna install
that latest version for you, so
you don't have to figure
out which one it is.
If you don't put that LTS flag,
I think it will install version 16,
which again is also fine as
long as it's at least 14.
So whatever you wanna do, install that
latest version, so we can get going, and
making some stuff.